New Post: Gui Challenges - Building color schemes (#5561)
GoogleChrome/web.dev: src/site/content/en/blog/building-a-color-scheme/index.md

[rgb](https://web.dev/learn/css/color/#rgb-(red-green-blue)). This GUI Challenge
has a base brand color of `#0af`. Firstly, for this color system, the hex value
needs converted to
[hsl](https://web.dev/learn/css/color/#hsl-(hue-saturation-lightness)).

```css/2
* {
  --brand: #0af;
  --brand: hsl(200 100% 50%);
}
```

In order to enable a concept of darkening or lightening the brand color, by say
20%, the 3 channels of the hsl color value need extracted into their own custom
properties, like this:

```css
* {
  --brand-hue: 200;
  --brand-saturation: 100%;
  --brand-lightness: 50%;
}
```

CSS can do math on those color properties, for example `calc(var(--brand-lightness) -
20%)` to decrease the lightness value by 20%. This is foundational to building a
color scheme as CSS can keep all colors in the same hue family by adjusting the
hsl saturation and lightness amounts.

## Light theme

Each color variant will be marked with its matching scheme, in this case, each
is appended with `-light`. 

{% Img src="image/vS06HQ1YTsbMKSFTIPl2iogUQP73/SS3ejtV78NsBGaNEjZhY.png",
alt="preview of the light theme end results", width="800", height="480" %}

### Brand

> Starting with the brand color, it's rebuilt by wrapping `--brand-hue`, `--brand-saturation`
> and `--brand-lightness` custom properties inside the hsl `()` function parenthesis,
> without any calculations made to it:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Starting with the brand color, it's rebuilt by wrapping `--brand-hue`, `--brand-saturation`
and `--brand-lightness` custom properties inside the hsl `()` function parenthesis,
without any calculations:
```

}
```

### Text colors

Next, the essentials of a color scheme need text colors. In a light theme, text
should be very dark. Notice how the lightness of the following colors is low,
well under 50%. 

```css
* {
  --text1-light: hsl(var(--brand-hue) var(--brand-saturation) 10%);
  --text2-light: hsl(var(--brand-hue) 30% 30%);
}
```

`--text1-light`, since it's very dark at 10% lightness, keeps the heavy 100%
saturation so the brand color can still peek through into the dark dark navy. 

{% Aside %} 
Most users wouldn't be able to tell you it's not black, but they
will notice it feels harmonious somehow. **The secret** is to reserve black and
white exclusively for brightest highlights and darkest shadows. 
{% endAside %}

`--text2-light`, it's not quite as dark as the 1st color, which is good as it's
a secondary color, and it's also much less saturated. 

### Surface colors

Surface colors are the backgrounds, borders and other decorative surfaces that
text sits upon or within. In a light theme, these are the light colors, as
opposed to the text colors which were dark. To create light colors with hsl,

> we'll use higher percentage values in the 3rd lightness value. We'll also lower

Reviewer: ```suggestion
we'll use higher percentage values in the third lightness value. We'll also lower
```

the saturation, so the light greys don't look too tinted.

```css
* {
  --surface1-light: hsl(var(--brand-hue) 25% 90%);
  --surface2-light: hsl(var(--brand-hue) 20% 99%);
  --surface3-light: hsl(var(--brand-hue) 20% 92%);
  --surface4-light: hsl(var(--brand-hue) 20% 85%);
}
```

4 surface colors were created since decorative colors tend to need more
variants, for interactive moments like `:focus` or `:hover` or to create the
appearance of paper layers. In these scenarios, it's nice to transition
`--surface2-light` on hover to `--surface3-light`, so a hover results in an

> increase of contrast (99% lightness to 92% lightness; darker). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
increase of contrast (99% lightness to 92% lightness; making it darker). 
```

### Light colors all together 

No need to hunt around to find how any of the light colors are made, they are
all in one place in the CSS.

```css
* {
  --brand-light: hsl(var(--brand-hue) var(--brand-saturation) var(--brand-lightness));
  --text1-light: hsl(var(--brand-hue) var(--brand-saturation) 10%);
  --text2-light: hsl(var(--brand-hue) 30% 30%);
  --surface1-light: hsl(var(--brand-hue) 25% 90%);
  --surface2-light: hsl(var(--brand-hue) 20% 99%);
  --surface3-light: hsl(var(--brand-hue) 20% 92%);
  --surface4-light: hsl(var(--brand-hue) 20% 85%);
  --surface-shadow-light: var(--brand-hue) 10% calc(var(--brand-lightness) / 5);
  --shadow-strength-light: .02;
}
```

<figure class="w-figure">
  {% Img 
    src="image/vS06HQ1YTsbMKSFTIPl2iogUQP73/f0H9hh4Qi0aQ61hZwOlU.png",
    alt="screenshot of the light colors all together", 
    width="800", height="144" 
  %}
  <figcaption class="w-figure">
    <a href="https://codepen.io/argyleink/pen/WNpyypP">Sandbox on CodePen</a>
  </figcaption>
</figure>

## Dark theme

Most brands don't begin with a dark theme, it's a variant of their primary,
usually lighter, theme. Users, on the other hand, often choose a dark theme for

> different contexts, like night time. These factors have led me to keeping 2

Reviewer: ```suggestion
different contexts, like night time. These factors have led me to keeping two
```

the dark theme does not. The saturation is cut in half and the lightness reduced
a relative 50%. 

```css
* {
  --brand-dark: hsl(
    var(--brand-hue) 
    calc(var(--brand-saturation) / 2)
    calc(var(--brand-lightness) / 1.5)
  );
}
```

### Text colors

In a dark theme, the text colors should be light. The following colors have high
values for lightness, putting them closer to white. 

```css
* {
  --text1-dark: hsl(var(--brand-hue) 15% 85%);
  --text2-dark: hsl(var(--brand-hue) 5% 65%);
}
```

### Surface colors

In a dark theme, the surface colors should be dark. The following colors have
low lightness and saturation, with the 1st surface being the darkest at 10%.

```css
* {
  --surface1-dark: hsl(var(--brand-hue) 10% 10%);
  --surface2-dark: hsl(var(--brand-hue) 10% 15%);
  --surface3-dark: hsl(var(--brand-hue) 5%  20%);
  --surface4-dark: hsl(var(--brand-hue) 5% 25%);
}
```

### Shadows

In a dark theme, shadows can be very hard to see. Makes sense since it's hard to
darken something that's already fairly dark. This is where
`--shadow-strength-dark` comes in super handy as it allows us to darken the

> shadows by changing 1 variable.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
shadows by changing one variable.
```

opacity calculations. The reason for this was to create a shadow I could adjust
within each color scheme. 

{% Img src="image/vS06HQ1YTsbMKSFTIPl2iogUQP73/cAjKit2v0f5dOQnUebCK.png",
alt="each shadow next to each other", width="800", height="477" %}

To accomplish this, I created 2 variables for each color scheme to adjust, a
shadow color and a shadow strength. The color is for saturation and darkness
adjustments, while the strength is for an easy way to drive up the shadow
intensity when it's a dark color scheme. End result was something like this.

```css
:root {
  --surface-shadow-light: var(--brand-hue) 10% 20%;
  --shadow-strength-light: .02;
}

.rad-shadow {
  box-shadow:
    0 2.8px 2.2px hsl(var(--surface-shadow) / calc(var(--shadow-strength) + .03)),
    0 6.7px 5.3px hsl(var(--surface-shadow) / calc(var(--shadow-strength) + .01)),
    0 12.5px 10px hsl(var(--surface-shadow) / calc(var(--shadow-strength) + .02)),
    0 22.3px 17.9px hsl(var(--surface-shadow) / calc(var(--shadow-strength) + .02)),
    0 41.8px 33.4px hsl(var(--surface-shadow) / calc(var(--shadow-strength) + .03)),
    0 100px 80px hsl(var(--surface-shadow) / var(--shadow-strength))
  ;
}
```

> If I was to go further with shadows in my color scheme, I'd make the shadow

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If I were to go further with shadows in my color scheme, I'd make the shadow
```

angles a design token constant too, as the light direction should be the same
between all the shadows of the design.

## Using of the color schemes

> With the predefining of colors complete, it's time to use them by providing them
> as values for scheme agnostic properties to disguise. What I mean is, as a CSS
> author inside this color scheme project, one should rarely need to access a
> specific color scheme's value. I want to make it easy to stay within the theme.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With the predefining of colors complete, it's time to turn them into 
scheme agnostic properties. What I mean is, as a CSS
author inside this color scheme project, one should rarely need to access a
specific color scheme's value. I want to make it easy to stay within the theme.
```

Author: lovely suggestion, ty!
